Śivadharma corpus

We have no evidence of the  (), a 24-chapter-long Sanskrit Śaiva text,
ever having been transmitted as separate from the so-called Śivadharma
corpus, [1] i.e., specific multiple-text manuscripts that typically
contain these eight texts:  (),  (),  (),  (),  (), ,  (), and the  ().
By now, much has been written on the corpus itself and on the individual
texts included. For an introduction, an overview of secondary
literature, an up-to-date bibliography, and the results of recent
Śivadharma-related research, see . Since the ’s links to other texts of
the corpus, except possibly the , are relatively weak, I will refer to
other Śivadharma texts only when they are relevant for the present
inquiry.

Title

The title [2] can be translated as ‘Compendium on the Essence of the
Bull [of Dharma].’ The last two elements () need little explanation:
this work is a ‘compendium’ on, a ‘collection’ or ‘summary’ of () the
‘essence’ (), of its topic, that is, a distilled version of relevant
teachings. The words ‘compendium’ and ‘collection’ clearly reflect the
composite nature of the ; see details on the structure of the text and
on its possible sources on pp. ff. The remaining question is whether the
bull in the title is only a reference to a representation of Dharma or
if it also hints at Śiva’s bull, his vehicle or mount, sometimes called
Nandi or Nandin in other works. [3]

Dharma is frequently referred to as a bull, often depicted as losing a
leg in every Kalpa. This portrayal appears in Dharma literature from at
least the time of the ; see, e.g.,  3.188.10–12, [4] and  1.81a () and
8.16a (). [5] In addition, in Śaiva contexts, the bull of Dharma does
feature as Śiva’s vehicle. See, e.g., the argument in , especially
p. 69, where, after analysing seals containing images of bulls, Bakker
remarks:

  The topicality of the Śaiva accommodation of the Dharma in the second
  half of the sixth century is nicely illustrated by a myth found in the
  original [; …] the uncontrollable, wild bull is domesticated by Śiva’s
  Gaṇapa Prabhākara […] In this way the bull is transformed into Śiva’s
  vehicle .

To put the same argument more bluntly:

  Making the bull Śiva’s vehicle implies that Śiva has become the
  supreme lord of the Dharma, or that the Dharma has been accommodated
  in [Ś]aivism. [6]

The possibility that the bull in the title  refers not only to Dharma as
a bull, but also to Śiva’s has been mentioned in , and briefly discussed
in , with the conclusion that

  while the bull as a synonym of Dharma is mentioned in the text
  repeatedly, somewhat surprisingly, and perhaps significantly, there is
  no clear reference to Śiva’s mount in the . [… Nevertheless, it] is
  not inconceivable that the redactors of the  had the same association
  in mind, namely that the bull in question is both Dharma and Śiva’s
  mount. [7]

Sanderson (, 210 n. 136) has the following to say on being Dharma in
general, and on the bull appearing on the coins of the Hephthalite Hun
Mihirakula in particular, also referencing the :

  To laud the bull () would be surprising if the intended meaning were
  the bull that is Śiva’s mount, but not if the word is intended in its
  figurative meaning, namely , or ‘the virtuous actions [prescribed by
  the Veda].’ For this meaning of see, for example, Amarasiṃha, 1.4.25b
  (), 3.3.220 (); Halāyudha, 1.125cd ();  8[.]16a (…); and the Gwalior
  Museum Stone Inscription of Pataṅgaśambhu (), l. 15, , concerning the
  Śaiva ascetic Vyomaśambhu: ‘He was in the world an extraordinary new
  Śiva, since he too was (‘devoted solely to pious observance’; in
  Śiva’s case ‘riding only on the Bull’) and he too was (‘one who had
  defeated sensual urges’; in Śiva’s case ‘the defeater of the Love god
  Kāmadeva’). This is also the meaning of in the title , one of the
  works of the Śivadharma corpus (see, e.g., ), i.e., ‘Summary of the
  Essentials of the [Śiva]dharma’.

In the last sentence here,  implies that the  is organically part of the
teachings that we may collectively call the Śivadharma, and he thus
supplies ‘Śiva’ when translating the title . A closer examination of the
 reveals no direct references to either Śiva’s bull or to the bull
embodying the Śivadharma. Instead, the bull in the  is repeatedly
associated with the Dharma which is the four s (see, e.g.,  3.1–5 and
4.74). My conclusion here is that while the word in the title may indeed
refer to Śiva’s bull, this reference is always only implied and never
explicitly stated, whereas the bull as the personification of Dharma as
the four s appears explicitly and repeatedly. Thus the title lacks any
explicit hint to Śaivism, [8] which aligns well with the text’s blurred
and multi-layered affiliation to Dharmaśāstra, Vaiṣṇavism, and Śaivism.
[9]

Finally, as a fanciful experiment, and if one accepts that the
 originated in Nepal, [10] one could wonder if the title  has anything
to do with the Licchavī king Vṛṣadeva. (, 74) mentions that Vṛṣadeva is
‘described in an inscription of his eighth-century descendant Jayadeva
as having inclined towards Buddhism; [11] a view conﬁrmed by a local
chronicle, which attributes to him the establishing of Buddhist images,’
and that this king established ‘the Caitya of the Sı̄nagu-vihāra (the
Svayambhūnāth Caitya).’ More importantly, Sanderson summarises the
information found in the Changu Narayana Pillar Inscription (east
shaft), [12] noting that Vṛṣadeva was the great-grandfather of Mānadeva,
whose ‘dated inscriptions range in date from 459 to 505/6’ []. [13] This
would place the reign of Vṛṣadeva around 400 . The early fifth century
may look too early for the date of composition of the , and any
connection between this king and the text is impossible to prove at the
moment. However, it is equally impossible to dismiss it entirely. If
such a connection exists, it might explain the slightly unusual nature
of the title (‘… the essence of the bull’).

Genre

Some texts of the Śivadharma corpus have been recognised as Purāṇas or
Upapurāṇas at certain points in their textual history (see, e.g., and ).
Could the  be considered a Purāṇa? There are at least two reasons to
support this idea. One is the section spanning  1.62–75, which provides
a list of so-called s, transmitters of Purāṇas, from Brahmā to Vyāsa
Dvaipāyana, Romaharṣa, and his son. Why would a text include such a list
in its first chapter if not to suggest that it is describing its own
origins?

Another argument is that the topics dealt with in the  are exactly what
we expect from a Purāṇa. The famous includes, following Wilson’s
translation (see ), the following: (1) primary creation, cosmogony and
chronology (); (2) creation, destruction of the world (); (3)
genealogies (); (4) Manu eras (s); (5) history (). [14] Arguably, all of
these elements are present in the , with most appearing in chapter one,
and again in chapters twenty-one and twenty-four, along with narratives
of the deeds of gods (e.g. in chapter twenty-three), and more. It is
possible that certain sections of the  were originally intended to form
a separate . The part in question could be the outermost layer of the
text (see pp. ff).

Could the VSS alternatively be classified as a Dharmaśāstra? The  does
contain features characteristic of Dharmaśāstric texts, such as
descriptions of rules of conduct (chapters 3–8) and discussions of the s
and s (chapters 11 and 19). However, other elements—such as narratives
(chapter 12), yogic teachings (chapter 16), lists of s (chapter 10), and
the frequent use of poetic metres (e.g. and )—are less obviously
Dharmaśāstric.

251v of paper MS  includes a scribal addition that provides a richer and
more nuanced definition of the genre of the , paraphrasing  1.56.21:
[15]

  [16]

  Should someone read [only as much as] the first [of] this with his
  senses subdued, [it would count as if] they had read all the Dharmic
  teachings. There is no doubt about this. This virtuous Arthaśāstra,
  this excellent Dharmaśāstra, this on Liberation was taught by Śiva,
  whose splendour is immeasurable.

According to this definition, the  is both an Arthaśāstra and a
Dharmaśāstra, and also a yogic text offering instructions on . One could
cautiously characterise the  as a heterogeneous text containing
Dharmaśāstric, Purāṇic, yogic, and narrative elements, similar to its
starting point and model, the .

Structure

As described in more detail in , the  contains at least three
discernible structural layers: a general Dharmaśāstric layer; a more or
less Vaiṣṇava layer; and a Śaiva layer. Figure 1 is a diagramme
reproduced from the same article, showing the textual divisions more
precisely.

The structure of the  (reproduced from )

Each layer is characterised by a dialogue between two interlocutors. The
layer that I label general Dharmaśāstric is a dialogue between king
Janamejaya and the sage Vaiśampāyana; the Vaiṣṇava layer is presented as
a dialogue between Vigatarāga, who is Viṣṇu in disguise, and
Anarthayajña, the ascetic; the Śaiva layer is a dialogue between Śiva
and Devī, as related by Nandikeśvara. The transitions between the layers
are smooth, that is to say, Nandikeśvara’s narrative is mentioned,
introduced, and told by Anarthayajña, whose dialogue with Vigatarāga is
in turn narrated to Janamejaya by Vaiśampāyana.

Another way to represent the overall structure of the  visually is shown
by Figure 2 on p. . The  is represented as a lotus whose petals
represent chapters. White petals indicate chapters within the general
Dharmaśāstric layer; light grey colour indicates the Vaiṣṇava layer;
dark grey colour indicates Śaiva chapters. The divisions are not
clear-cut: the first few verses of chapter one belong to the general
layer, and transitions also occur within chapters. Additionally, the
layers are not hermetically sealed, and there is some ‘leaking’ between
the chapters. Śaiva chapters may contain Vaiṣṇava material, and vice
versa. The labels beside the petals represent keywords indicating the
main topics of each chapter. Big check marks indicate the presence of
Anarthayajña the ascetic in the given chapter, while smaller check marks
indicate references in the given chapters to Anarthayajña’s ascetic
practice repeatedly called , i.e. ‘non-material’ or ’internalised
sacrifice/worship.’ Anarthayajña in both senses seems to be one of the
main foci of the .

The main theme of the Dharmaśāstric layer is Janamejaya’s desire to hear
the condensed and ultimate Dharmic teachings of the  from Vaiśampāyana.
A brief overview of the Vaiṣṇava chapters would be the following.
Anarthayajña, a Vaiṣṇava ascetic, who propagates a system of
internalised s, or, a system beyond the traditional s, and who was born
into an obscure or fluid (), is being tested by Viṣṇu; he passes the
test and follows Viṣṇu to Viṣṇuloka. The Śaiva layer is a collection of
chapters addressing internalised pilgrimage places, relating a tale on
donating a wife to a Brahmin, embryology, karma, the , yoga, and more.

Another general observation is that roughly one-fourth of the text
elaborates on rules of religious conduct . Also, chapter two seems
slightly out of place, being a clearly Śaiva chapter inserted into the
Vaiṣṇava layer and in the corresponding dialogue of the Vaiṣṇava
interlocutors. It is not inconceivable that the Śaiva layer, which
contains a teaching on non-material sacrifice (,  11.5a) is the oldest
part of the . The Vaiṣṇava layer may have been developed later, with the
legend of Anarthayajña constructed around that concept and phrase.

1em

The structure and topics of the  

Connection to other texts

The ’s indebtedness to the  () is evident from its very first verses. As
already noted, the frame story in the  comprises

  a dialogue between Janamejaya and Vaiśampāyana, echoing the setting of
  the frame story of the . Janamejaya is the king at whose
  snake-sacrifice Vaiśampāyana recited the whole  for the first time.
  This important moment is where the frame story of the  takes off:
  Janamejaya has listened to the entire , but having had the desire to
  hear the ultimate teaching on Dharma, he is bound to remain
  unsatisfied. Asked by Janamejaya for a higher teaching on Dharma which
  can lead to liberation, Vaiśampāyana relates a dialogue between
  Vigatarāga (in fact Viṣṇu in disguise) and Anarthayajña, an ascet­ic.
  [17]

Thus the frame story in the  suggests that the text is to be ideally
read as a summary or higher synthesis of the Dharmic teachings found in
the . [18] The ’s connection to the  is also evident from quotations
from and paraphrases of  passages; e.g.,  1.4ab =  13.112.9ab,  1.29d =
 12.220.41d,  3.15cdef   Suppl. 1.36.10,  3.16cd    12.8.17ab,  3.29–32
  13.117.37–38  3.34ab =  13.116.14ab,  4.5ab   1.77.16,  4.10 =
 1.69.22,  6.20–22   6.39.14–16 (=  17.14–16),  8.21   12.214.9, etc.,
although as always, it is not certain if these borrowings come directly
from the  or through the vehicle of some Purāṇas or the . [19] The story
of the mongoose referenced in  4.48 appears as  14.92–93. The 25- system
in chapter 20 echoes and is partly based on  12.247.1–10 (Mokṣadharma).
[20]

Moreover, a significant number of passages in the  derive from Purāṇas
and from . Examples for Purāṇic parallels include  1.28   1.11.32,  1.33
  3.2.101,  3.11cd   1.70.295ab   1.8.22cd   1,5.37,  4.9cd   193.36cd,
 4.11   193.37, and so on so forth.  is quoted widely in the : see,
e.g.,  3.34–37, 4.77–81, 5.8–9, 5.13ab, 5.14ab, 5.19ab, 11.53ab.

The possibility of influence from Śaiva tantric works is minimal, but
not to be excluded. EXAMPLES. Niśvāsakārikā ?

Śivadharma texts:

Embryology

yoga  see below Dhyāna in the  and the

Compare, borrowings

Buddhacarita

Bṛhatkālottara,

Skanda

Dating and provenance

There are several reasons to believe that Nepal, specifically the
Kathmandu valley, is the most likely location for the composition or
final redaction of the . The most probable period for this composition
is the first half of the poorly documented ‘transitional period’ [21] in
the history of Nepal. This is a ‘relatively obscure period […] [b]etween
the Licchavis, who last appear in epigraphical record in 737 [], and the
Malla kings, who ruled from 1200–1768.’ [22]

To support these assumptions, we can consider the following: the
location of the manuscript evidence; place names and individuals
mentioned; and a possible influence of any local language on the style
and grammar of the text.

All MSS known to us that transmit the  hail from Nepal. This in itself
is not strong evidence but it stands in stark contrast with the MSS
situation of the  and the . [23]

The geographical locations mentioned in the  include the s mentioned in
chapter ten: Himavat (the Himālayas), Kurukṣetra, Prayāga, Vārāṇasī,
Yamunā, Gaṅgā, Agnitīrtha, Somatīrtha, Sūryatīrtha, Puṣkara, Mānasa,
Naimiṣa, Bindusāra (= Bindusaras), Setubandha, Suradraha or Surahrada,
Ghaṇṭikeśvara, and Vāgīśa. These may hint at the area where the  was
composed by giving more significance to locations nearby and by being
more specific when mentioning local sacred places. Some names on the
list above are easy to indentify and at the same time probably too often
included in lists such as this one to be indicative enough: Himavat,
Kurukṣetra, [24] Prayāga, Vārāṇasī, Yamunā, Gaṅgā, Puṣkara (modern
Pushkar), and Naimiṣa. [25] All these are locations in modern North
India, or in the case of Himavat, for our purposes and more precisely,
in North India and Nepal. Agnitīrtha, Somatīrtha and Sūryatīrtha could
also be locations in North India, although they are more obscure than
the ones above. For Agnitīrtha, see, e.g.,  3.45.27ab: ; and  6.139.1ab:
; therefore Agnitīrtha may be placed at the southern banks of the Yamunā
or at the northern banks of the Sābhramatī river (modern Sabarati) in
the area of Ahmedabad. Somatīrtha is also sometimes placed on the banks
of the Sabarmati, see, e.g.,  6.161.1ab: . Sūryatīrtha is sometimes
placed in Kurukṣetra. [26] Going further in the list, Mānasa is
generally thought to be ‘[a] lake on the peak of the Himālayas,’ [27]
modern Manasarovar. [28] Bindusāra, which most probably stands for
Bindusaras, can be a sacred place north of Mount Kailāsa, [29] two miles
south of Gaṅgotri, [30] or alternatively Sitpur in Gujarat, north-west
of Ahmedabad. [31]

In contrast with these, Setubandha is the traditional name for the ridge
of rocks between South India and Śrī Laṅkā, and Ghaṇṭikeśvara could be a
sacred place in Orissa. [32] Vāgīśa seems difficult to locate, but it is
most probably a sacred place east of Kathmandu. This toponym comes up in
 3.21–25 as a location south of and not far from the
Hanumadīśvara-liṅga, which is in the southern outskirts of Bhaktapur in
Nepal, at the confluence of two rivers (according to ):

  |
  || 3.21
  |
  || 3.22
  |
  || 3.23
  |
  || 3.24
  |
  || 3.25

  Not far from the confluence, [Vālmīki] prepared a nice sacrificial
  ground together with the sages, and performed the Vājapeya sacrifice.
  After having completed the sacrifice, Vālmīki, the best of the
  twice-born, the truest of sages, climbed the mountain on which fresh
  grass was growing(?) [33] together with the sages. In a valley of the
  mountain which was embellished with various waterfalls, he installed a
  called Vālmīkīśvara. Having installed that great , Vālmīki, the truest
  of sages, surrounded by groups of sages, returned to his own on the
  banks of the river Tamasā. If one sees the Vālmīkīśvara [], one will
  have the power of speech . That is why the wise call it the
  Vāgīśvara-liṅga.

I have reproduced a map from the beginning of as Figure 4 on p.  below.
On this map, Vāgīśvara is placed north-east of Bhaktapur.

The only toponym left from the list with which we started this section
is Suradraha. [34] This sacred place is mentioned as the most important
one in  18.15, in a chapter that lists personal names, placenames,
rivers, deities, etc., that are considered the best of all others in the
same category:

  |
  || 18.15

  The best god is Hari. [35] The best river is the Ganges. The best
  austerity is fasting. The best pilgrimage-place is Suradraha.

This suggests that the location of Suradraha could potentially give us a
hint on the geographic centre of the community in which the  was
commissioned or composed. Unfortunately, up to this moment, I have not
been able to obtain any useful information on Suradraha. Nevertheless, I
suppose that it should be a sacred place in the Kathmandu valley. The
word is attested in Monier-Williams’ Sanskrit-English Dictionary as a
variant of (‘pond’). In classical Newar the corresponding form is ().
Suradaha may stand for Sūradaha, that is Sūryadaha, which is a ‘pond
situated in Devakuru’ according to (, 850). [36] In fact, Sūryahrada,
that is, Sūradaha, is one of the so-called -lakes in Devakuru in the
North in Jaina cosmography (see ).

All the above is based on  chapter ten. All locations have been entered
in the map which is Figure 3 on p. . The impression one gets is clearly
a north-Indian or Nepalese focus.

Chapter twelve also contains toponyms that could refine or contradict
what we have seen so far. The narrative of this chapter starts in
Kusumanagara at the confluence of the Gaṅgā and the Gaṇḍakī rivers,
which is Pāṭaliputra (12.4 and 12). As the story develops, Vipula, our
hero, departs from Kusumanagara to travel to a far-away land, which is
identified by a fellow traveller as the city of Naravīrapura in the
Deccan (12.60). It is difficult to find a Naravīrapura that would fit
the context. I suspect that what could have been meant is Karavīrapura,
possibly modern Kolhapur in Maharashtra. [37] Since this placename, and
the Sahya mountains (12.93), [38] come up in the framework of a
dreamlike, fanciful part of the narrative, playing the role of ‘the
far-away, magical land,’ a Nepalese origin of the  is still tenable.
[39]

Perhaps the most telling of all toponyms found in the  is
Mṛgendraśikhara, where Anarthayajña’s is situated, ‘on the southern
slopes of the Himalayas.’ [40] This name comes up several times in the
 and thus features on the map in (Figure 4). Mṛgendraśikhara is a
mountain situated north of Kathmandu. Today the area is called Śivapurī.
 7.32ff tells a story about king Sūryaketu, a Viṣṇu-worshipper, who is
attacked by king Haṃsadhvaja, the ruler of Mithilā. Sūryaketu is advised
by Nārada to go and hide at Mṛgendraśikhara ( 7.48):

  |
  |
  |
  ||

  Nārada spoke: Go to Mṛgendraśikhara, O king, and stay there. O king,
  set up your hiding place there where the beautiful Vāgvatī, the best
  of rivers, rises.

Nārada goes on to describe legends connected to Mṛgendraśikhara. After
Viṣṇu assumed his (half-man, half-)lion-form and killed Hiraṇyakaśipu,
he retreated to the Himālayas. The part of the mountain where Viṣṇu
stayed is called Mṛgendraśikhara exactly because he stayed there in
lion-form. Seeking to meet Viṣṇu, the grateful Prahlāda follows the god.
He cannot find him, instead he starts performing penance. Śiva appears
and he is pleased with Prahlāda’s penance. The Vāgvatī river rises from
his laugh ( 7.50–58). These are related in a similar fashion in the .
[41]

The  specifies that Anarthayajña’s was on the banks of the
Mahendrapathagā. [42] A candidate for this, based on the fact that its
name seems a synonym and on its location, could be Indramārgā mentioned
in  2.9, a river flowing from the sacred place called Indramārga in the
valley of Mṛgendraśikhara. The verse states that bathing at the
confluence of the Indramārgā and the Vāgmatī transports one to
Indraloka. Indramārgā is identified as modern Dhobi Khola. [43]

-1em[image]

A possible reconstruction of the geography of the . Toponyms in italics
are uncertain. Map constructed using a simple hydrographic map made by
Daniel Dalet (d-maps.com).

[]

Map in

The location with which the ascetic Anarthayajña is connected strongly
suggests the Kathmandu valley as the geographical focus of the  because
he is a key figure and main interlocutor in the , possibly the reason
behind the composition of the text. [44]

Turning to names of individuals mentioned in the , those that might
betray anything about the place or time of composition of the text
include King Siṃhajaṭa and queen Kekayī, rulers of Nara- or Karavīrapura
in the narrative of chapter twelve. Unfortunately, so far I have not
been able to link these names to any historical or legendary persons.
The name of the hero of the same chapter, Vipula, may be familiar from
 13.40.16–13.43.16.:

  Devaśarman asks his disciple, Vipula, to protect his wife, Ruci,
  primarily from Indra’s amorous advances, while he is away from home.
  Vipula decides that the only way he can protect Ruci is from within,
  i.e., by entering her body by yogic powers. Vipula succeeds in
  protecting Ruci’s reputation and departs to practise extreme
  austerities. Later he encounters several people (in fact, as we learn
  later, Day and Night, and the six seasons) who mention ‘Vipula’s path
  leading to the other world’ (,  13.42.27cd) as something horrible. He
  wonders what sins he may have committed that could yield such
  unfortunate consequences. He realizes that by not telling Devaśarman
  that he actually entered Ruci’s body, he lied and thus may have
  commited a horrible sin. When Devaśarman learns about this, he praises
  Vipula for his services instead, and all three, Devaśarman, his wife,
  and Vipula, go to heaven. [45]

Thus, ironically, while the Vipula of the  is famous for protecting
somebody else’s wife, a rather different Vipula in  chapter twelve
donates his own wife to a Brahmin as soon as the latter expresses
interest in her. It is more than possible that the two characters have
no connection at all. [46]

Other characters in  chapter twelve—Kapila, Vipula’s father; Bhīmabala,
a traveller; Puṇḍaka, the foreman of the guild; and Caṇḍa and Vicaṇḍa,
two royal envoys—seem to be of little use for us to ascertain the time
and place of composition or redaction of the .

Going further, as mentioned above, any discernible influence of a local,
vernacular language on the style or grammar of a Sanskrit work could
also be useful to locate the text in question geographically. The
language of the  displays numerous oddities that could be explained by
the interference of some other language, most likely early classical
Newar. On this, see a separate section below on pp. ff.

In addition, the quotes from  in the  usually contain variants that can
be found in the apparatus in Olivelle’s critical edition of  () as
belonging overwhelmingly to what Olivelle calls the ‘Northern
Transmission.’ [47] This again confirms a North-Indian or Nepalese
origin for the .

The obvious terminus ante quem for the composition or redaction of the
 is the date of the earliest MSS that transmits it. The earliest dated
MS containing the  is , dated to Nepal Saṃvat 156, i.e., 1035-36 . [48]
In a multiple-text MS [49] that is potentially earlier than , the  is
written in a hand that appears later than that used for some of the
other texts in that MS. [50] The final colophon of the  (and the ) in
this MS (50r) is followed by the date [Nepāla] ‘ 192,’ i.e., 1071-1072 .

These two MSS make it impossible to date the  later than the first half
of the 11th century , and parts of the text may be considerably older.
Archaic features that may indicate that the , or parts of it, were
composed much earlier than the early 11th century include the following.
Chapter ten, [51] while it teaches the yogic tubes Suṣumnā and Iḍā, is
silent on Piṅgalā, which is a situation similar to that in the
6-7-century [52] (see details in the notes to the translation).
Similarly, 11.23a () mentions four Śaiva s, instead of the expected and
somewhat later, and in character tantric, five, namely , , , , and . In
the same chapter, the order in which the s are taught () is reminiscent
of  2.9.21.1, and is relatively rare, as opposed to the traditional
order () found, e.g., in . (See .) Another feature that might point
towards a date considerably earlier than the 11th century is the system
of s in chapter 20: the s of classical Sāṅkhya are called s here, the s
of classical Sāṅkhya are called s, [53] the of classical Sāṅkhya is
called , and the highest is singular unlike the multiple s of classical
Sāṅkhya. These may well be archaisms included in the  consciously, but
they could also indicate that the time of composition of the  is much
closer to pre-classical Sāṅkhya than what the MS evidence suggests. [54]

All in all, in light of all the above, it is difficult to be more
precise on the dating of the  than saying that its production must have
happened before the end of the 10th century, or the beginning of the
11th century  if our oldest dated MS that transmits the  is close in
time to the actual composition or redaction of the text. The date could
also be considerably earlier than the 10th century, and therefore a
tentative dating for the  would consider the 7th to 10th centuries .

Authors, redactors and target audience

Why was the  included in the Śivadharma corpus?

One of the objectives of the article was to find clues about the rôle of
the  in the Śivadharma corpus. The conclusion therein (pp. 200–201),
focusing on the fusion of Vaiṣṇava and Śaiva material in the , and on
the reinterpretations of the system in its eleventh chapter, includes
the following:

  The ’s role in the Śivadharma corpus is then twofold: it provides a
  text that is suitable for Vaiṣṇavas and Śaivas, presenting its
  teachings on different levels of an esoteric scale, the Śaiva
  teachings being closest to the core, and always providing an
  internalised, secret version of topics discussed in the other layers;
  and it also reinvents the traditional system in a Śaiva way, but in
  such a manner that would be acceptable for other religious groups.
  This may be an attempt to further develop an idea that appears in both
  the  and the .

Indeed, one of the most striking feature of the  is its structure in
which Vaiṣṇava material surrounds Śaiva teachings (see pp. ff. above).
Even the title is not unambiguously Śaiva, as we have seen (see pp. ff.
above). Can we still say that this text is Śaiva? Does it aim at a sort
of balance of Vaiṣṇava and Śaiva teachings? Does this duality reflect
the religiopolitical reality of the era?

Radicalism in chapters 2, 11, 19

MORE...

Pāśupata and tantric influence

One of the major questions concerning the Śivadharma corpus is whether
it was aware of or influenced by Tantrism. This question is perhaps more
important in the case of earlier Śivadharma texts, such as the  and the
, than for the , which was likely composed later. Tantric influence in
the 7-10th-century, or more likely 9-10th-century,  would not be
surprising; what is more revealing is whether this influence is early
(5-8th century) or late (9-10th century), which may help determine the
text’s date.

The description of Śiva’s Universe () in chapter two contains clear
references to the five Brahma-mantras (usually regarded as Vedic in
origin, but possibly entering the Pāśupata and later Śaiva tantric
traditions from other sources), [55] or five faces of Sadāśiva: Īśāna,
Tatpuruṣa, Aghora, Sadyojāta, and Vāmadeva (2.26–33). Their traditional
division into s also appears (2.31–32). Other glimpses into the Pāśupata
realm can be seen in chapter eight. In verse 8.2, the Pāśupata tradition
is explicitly named alongside the ‘Śaiva’ school. Additionally, the
religious observances given in verses 8.13–18, particularly the Dog and
Cow Observances (8.15–16) evoke Pāśupata practices. [56] Verses 8.35–43
describe various modes of ritual bathing. The first, Fire Bath, is
explicitly referred to as a ‘Pāśupata observance’ (), and is praised as
the most important () in verse 8.39. (Note that chapter eight, despite
these influences, is part of a layer of the text that otherwise could be
labelled as Vaiṣṇava.) [57]

As for any possible Mantramārgic or Saiddhāntika influence, Sadāśiva,
Paraśiva, and Śiva as Paramātman are mentioned in 16.34 as corresponding
to breaths. [58] Sadāśiva appears in a visualisation in  6.16, and is
said to be the original teacher of the internalisation of the s,
bestowing this knowledge on Maheśvara (11.4, 25). The term generally
means visualization, similarly to its tantric usage, in verses 4.72–73
(Śaiva), 6.7–18 (mostly Śaiva, but said to be taught by Hari), 10.23 (a
visualisation of the deity in the centre of a lotus), 10.25–26 (an
obscure visualisation possibly echoing  5.16), and in chapter 16, the
main yogic teaching, and in chapter 22. [59] An obscure reference to a
36- system appears in 4.73, possibly indicating familiarity with a
full-fledged tantric ontological system, in stark contrast with the
highly detailed account and propagation of a 25--system in chapter 20.
[60] Similary, the terms in 9.5 may betray some knowledge of Śaiva
tantric theology. Mantras resembling those of the tantric Mantramārga,
apart from , are largely absent in the , however chapter twenty-two
presents an obscurely, perhaps unbreakably, encoded ten-syllable mantra.

Finally, the Pañcarātra tradition is mentioned several times (10.33,
16.36–37), but its presence, similar to some  passages, [61] tells us
little about the text’s date.

In summary, the Pāśupatas are clearly known and highly regarded in the ,
and while tantric influence is subtle, the cumulative evidence suggests
that Tantra was present in the vicinity of the text’s conception.

Buddhist influence

The presence of Buddhist influence in the  is also subtle but
noticeable. The four s—, and —are mentioned in 4.71 as ‘the four s,’
possibly indicating only a superficial familiarity with the concept.
[62] They are also referenced in 11.34 and 11.56 in the context of the
internalization of the ’s and ’s modes of life. Additionally, a rule
given in 11.46 concerning begging might echo a Buddhist precept. Viṣṇu,
one of the interlocutors in chapters 1–9 and 19–21, assumes the name
Vigatarāga (“passionless”) when disguised as a Brahmin, a name that may
carry faint Buddhist connotations. A possible influence from the  is
seen in 4.55–57 and 70, while the teachings on in 4.69 seem similar to
Buddhist teachings. In summary,  chapter 4, and to some extent chapter
11, display faint signs of Buddhist influence. This may contribute to
the text’s broader program of offering a foundational Dharma text for
devotees of all religions present at the time and place of its
composition.

Misc

susūkṣma: Śivadharmottara 10.45cd–46: rudraḥ ṣaḍviṃśakaḥ proktaḥ śivaś
ca paratas tataḥ 45 saptaviṃśatimaḥ śāntaḥ susūkṣmaḥ parameśvaraḥ
svargāpavargayor dātā taṃ vijñāya vimucyate 46

Language

Newar influence?

The oddities of the language of the VSS go beyond the idiosyncrasies of
epic Sanskrit. This dialect exhibits some similarities to Śaiva Aiśa
Sanskrit, [63] and it often applies peculiar metrical licences and uses
a special vocabulary, morphology, and syntax. The analysis of this
language, ideally, would help us define the identity of the author(s) or
redactor(s) of the text, and confirm our views on its place of
composition. To feed a working hypothesis, I will mention parallelisms
between the language of the  and early classical Newar—since the  was
most probably produced in the Kathmandu valley [64] —whenever possible.
Of course, the assumable date of the composition of the , which is
without much doubt pre-early-11th century, does not allow any direct
comparison with contemporary Newar language texts. [65] Therefore I have
to project a much later Newar grammar onto an earlier and less
well-known state of the language, which is not without risks.

In the following, I will only give a brief overview of the most
important phenomena. For details, see the observations on the
constitution of the Sanskrit text in the footnotes to the translation,
as well as the Index.

Number and gender

One of the most evident deviation from Pāṇinian grammar in the text of
the  is a general disregard of grammatical concord as to number and
gender. [66] See, e.g., a plural verb (metri causa?) with a singular
subject in  1.25ab:

  When [Brahmā’s] night falls, the whole moving and unmoving universe
  dissolve[s].

See a neuter plural participle picking up a neuter singular and a
feminine singular noun in 1.61ab:

  The numbers [pertaining to] the measurements have been taught in
  brief.

This confusion, or often metrically forced disregard of standard
Sanskrit grammar, when dealing with number and gender, becomes almost
predictable when the noun phrase involves numerals. [67] See, e.g.,
verse 1.2cd:

  Having listened to the , to all its hundred section[s] …

Here one would expect either a plural genitive , a compound , or a
plural accusative . Similarly, in 3.5a stands for (‘and the paths are to
be known as five’), partly metri causa; and an interrogative quantifier
(, ‘how many?’) can trigger the same: (3.1d; ‘how many are its
path[s]?’). It is not without interest that classical Newar rarely
applies any plural marker in noun phrases with numerals. [68] Moreover
in Newar, ‘nouns denoting inanimate objects are indifferent as to
number.’ [69] A further clear example is verse 3.6cd:

  He has thirteen beautiful wives with nice waists.

Here, with no variants in any of the MSS consulted, only the very end of
the noun phrase has the required plural ending. This again is what we
often see in Newar. [70] A good example of total number-blindness is
5.17cd:

  … the practice of purity is definitely expounded in great detail.

Note that there would have been little problem in composing the same
line in standard Sanskrit, e.g., beginning with Instead, this line gives
away something about the author’s indifference towards grammatical
concord. [71] Also, the participle might function here as a finite verb
in the plural: ‘they teach [the practice of purity].’ In this case there
is some sense of number but coupled with a totally blurred boundary
between active finite verbs and passive participles.

A special case is when the text appears to quote from an external source
but choses to change the plural to the singular. E.g.,  4.77 is a
citation of  11.55, a verse that also features in the  and in the . [72]
In all its versions, c of this stanza contains a plural when labelling a
list of the five ‘grievous sins,’ except for the one in the , which
prefers a singular. [73] There seems to be some heavy gravitation
towards the singular in the ’s language. In general, gender confusion,
and to a certain degree, number confusion, are not unusual in epic
Sanskrit and in Aiśa, [74] but it is its extent in the  that suggests a
very strong external influence, supposedly of classical Newar.

Case and syntax

An extreme example of a total lack of awareness of Sanskrit syntax is
 17.20:

  |
  ||

  He who donates to a poor and distressed Brahmin land that yields
  plenty of corn and is in the vicinity of water will go to the world of
  the king of the immortal ones [i.e. of Indra] on a fascinating ærial
  vehicle.

The translation of this verse, surprising as it may seem, is, judging
from the context, rather secure. s ab probably stand for a sentence that
would be the following in slightly more standard Sanskrit: . This is
expressed by a phrase in which a word that should be in the dative or
genitive is in the vocative, or rather in stem form, and everything else
is in the nominative: endings seem but decorations. This is difficult to
explain by classical Newar influence since Newar does have a dative case
marker, with animate nouns added to the genitive marker. Similarly
difficult is to explain why then s cd are written in perfect standard
Sanskrit. [75]

There are dozens, or hundreds, of syntactical oddities in the , even if
not all this baffling. [76] Somewhat similarly to what Kölver describes
in his analysis of the language of the , a Nepalese composition (),
there often (but not always!) seems to be a lack of understanding of the
passive, together with the application of the ergative, one of the basic
syntactical tools of classical Newar. To demonstrate this, a good
example is 12.113cd:

  It was Indra who gave me the fruit and I gave that fruit to you.

Again, this is the translation that seems to fit the context. Here the
skeleton of c is a well-constructed passive: , but then, instead of
adding a dative or genitive (e.g., ), the author chooses a finite verb
(). In d, after seemingly treating as a masculine noun, and leaving in
 metri causa, and using for , [77] this time he ends the phrase with a
noun in the nominative instead of the dative or genitive. Why not try to
write , [78] or ? Constructions with / plus an expected dative are
especially prone to confusion. See, e.g.,  1.62cd–63ab and 10.2d:

  [The Purāṇas] were taught by Brahmā to Mātariśvan [= Vāyu] in their
  entirety, in their true form. Vāyu abridged the verses and then gave
  [them] to Uśanas.

  I shall teach you an ancient legend that Nandi told me.

Again, there is some struggle first with an expected dative here: it
ends up in the nominative . Then an expected agent in the instrumental,
or rather another dative, becomes an accusative . Thirdly, stands for or
.

Somewhat similar are constructions with a past participle plus in place
of an active finite verb. See, e.g., 13.68cd, 14.56ab and 15.15cd:

  This is how I have told you the formation of the embryo, O Varānanā.

  I have taught, O Varānanā, the Fiery constituents and the Soma-ones.

  Thus have I briefly described [to you, O Mahādevī, the soul.] What
  else would you like to hear?

These are also similar to what analyses in a Sanskrit passage in the
Newar , namely that the phrase must in that context mean ‘I did not
know.’ [79]

Sometimes the agent of an active construction with a transitive verb
simply imitates an ergative structure: (1.8), (4.75ab), [!] (12.60a).
[80]

Another typical syntactical construction in the  is a verb meaning ‘to
tell, teach’ plus a noun in the genitive, e.g. 4.69ab:

  I shall tell you about the four cases of observing silence. Listen, be
  attentive.

One could say that a is simply elliptical and that a verb like or (‘the
caracteristics/essence [of X]’) is missing. 1.37ab and 4.17ab also
belong to this category:

  How could I enumerate [all the details of] the Brahmāṇḍa[s], O
  twice-born?

  Thus have [I] taught you the rules of truth, O virtuous one.

This phenomenon is difficult to explain by any Newar influence since
classical Newar would usually also require an extra word (such as
‘thing, topic, word, story’) in such a sentence. It might belong to a
class of phenomena in Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit that Edgerton labels
‘genitive with miscellaneous verbs.’ [81]

These kinds of deviations from standard Sanskrit make it necessary that
the translation be somewhat intuitive, driven by the context, rather
than forced by an adherence to standard Sanskrit syntax. [82]

Cardinal and ordinal numbers

Although the  does use simple ordinal numbers such as , , and , with
higher numbers there seems to be a non-distinction between cardinal and
ordinal numbers, and cardinals are used as ordinals. See, e.g., 20.8ab
and 11ab:

  Know the twenty-fourth Tattva certainly as Prakṛti. The twenty-second
  Tattva is Ahaṃkāra according to the wise.

This phenomenon is known to a certain degree from epic Sanskrit, [83]
and is even more characteristic of classical Newar. [84]

Stem form nouns

 nouns, or s, are extremely common in the language of the . They are not
alien to the Aiśa Sanskrit of Śaiva Tantras, [85] but the extent to
which they prevail in the  is striking and it reminds one of the zero
suffix of the nominative and accusative, or rather of the ‘casus
indefinitus’ or ‘absolutive case,’ of classical Newar. [86] Often s are
required to restore the metre, and they would thus be difficult to
emend, and often they blend in sandhi with the following word. See some
clearcut examples below with the expected, but usually unmetrical, form
in parentheses:

  1.63a: ()
  1.63c: ()
  2.25c: ()
  2.26d: ()
  4.19f: (°)
  4.72a: (°)
  4.77a: (° or °)
  6.5c: ()
  6.14a: ()

Vocabulary

Special items of the vocabulary of the VSS include the following: for
(in some MSS in 4.3b, and 4.47b): see ; as nominative 10.27cd, 20.17a,
22.24ab: see in Aiśa, ; for (3.5c, 4.6a, 4.30a, 8.4c, 12.150,, 18.15,
etc.); instead of (8.30d, 11.4b, 12.24b, 12.55a, 12.113d, etc.): see ;
[] for [] (2.13a, 12.151b); for (1.3a): see Middle Indic mentioned in ;
for (1.12d); for (thematisation, 1.52c); for (possibly 2.3a); for
(2.6d); for (thematisation, 9.16a); for (thematisation, 10.27a); for
(12.36c); for (thematisation, 12.63a, 12.80a); for (thematisation,
12.110d).

Metre

As regards metrical licences, perhaps the most striking feature is the
generous use of the poetic licence sometimes labelled ‘muta cum
liquida,’ [87] namely that some consonant clusters that would normally
turn the previous light syllable heavy may in some cases do not do so.
[88] Syllables beginning with , and also , especially (in theory
exclusively) at the beginning of words, are well-known candidates for
this licence. [89] In the , , and also , [90] , and , can also trigger
this phenomenon. [91] All these syllables involve conjunct consonants
with a semivowel in second position. Since the sound in first position
is not always a plosive (‘muta’), the term ‘muta cum liquida’ is
actually less than perfect in our case. I propose the terms ‘ licence’
or ’.’ To give reasons for this, and for context, it is perhaps not
useless to briefly show what a well-known author on prosody,
Kedārabhaṭṭa (11th or 12th century), [92] who is frequently quoted by
Mallinātha, has to say on this phenomenon in his (here given together
with Sulhaṇa’s commentary): [93]

  [94] |
  || 1.10 ||

  In this [field, i.e. in ], conjunct consonants in a word-initial
  syllable is called a ‘sequence’ conjunct ([]). [A syllable that counts
  as] heavy because one such [consonant cluster] stands in front [of it,
  i.e. after it] can sometimes be treated as light.

  [Comm.:] | | | [] | | | || 10 || |  |

  A ‘word’ is [a unit of speach that] ends in an inflection. A
  ‘conjunct’ is in a ‘syllable’ which is at the beginning of such a
  word. ‘In this’ field of science, it is to be known under the term
  ‘sequence’ . By that sequence which stands in front, [a syllable] at
  the end of the previous word, even if it acquired heaviness [by
  position], may acquire lightness. ‘Sometimes’ [means:] as required. If
  you have doubts about this combination of consonants called ‘sequence’
  (), [I reply:] the old teachers such as Piṅgalanāga and poets such as
  Kālidāsa accepted [this] rule. The conjunct is the sequence[-type]
  [i.e. word-initial] conjunct [in this case]. Among [the
  possibilities,] for example with the conjunct . Here is an example of
  that:

  |
  || 1.11 ||

  Tender mustard seed, fresh porridge, and creamy curds: men in the
  village eat these kinds of savoury dishes, O pretty girl, because they
  do not have much money. [95]

The example verse given above (1.11) is in , and the metric pattern of
the second half-verse is, strictly speaking, the following:

- - |  -  | -  -! | -   | - - |  | - - | - |

For any , this is unmetrical for it yields 28 moræ, instead of the
expected 27. By treating the final syllable of short, in spite of the
following , the pattern conforms to the expected pattern:

- - |  -  | -   | -   | - - |  | - - | - |

The commentator gives several more examples, involving the syllables , ,
and , and confirms that the rule applies only to word-initial consonant
clusters:

  Why ‘at the beginning of a word’? [Because] elsewhere it should not
  be.

Here follow some examples from the . The syllables with the conjunct
consonant, before which the syllable is not turned into long, are
encircled, and the metre is given in parentheses.

  1.1c: ()
  4.67c: ()
  4.89a: ()
  5.5cd: ()
  5.9cd: ()
  5.15ab: ()
  6.13ab: ()
  8.33a: ()
  10.31b: ()
  11.9ab: ()

These indeed follow the rule of having the special conjunct with the
semivowel at the beginning of a word in the sense that the word can be a
member of a compound. [96] As noted above, since conjuncts such as and
show up in this phenomenon, the phrase ‘muta cum liquida’ is slightly
misleading, and therefore I use the phrase ‘ licence’ instead. To
understand how unique the ’s indulgence in this licence is, the epics
and the Purāṇas should perhaps be examined from this perspective.

Another metrical odditity, or rather metrical licence, applied regularly
in the , exclusively in non- verses, is that a word-final light syllable
can count as heavy. Here are some examples, with the light syllable now
turned heavy encircled:

  3:42d: ()
  4.5a: () [97]
  4.39c: ()
  4.59c: ()
  4.59d: ()
  5.20a: ()
  6.18b: ()
  7.13b: ()
  8.44d: ()
  11.42b: ()
  11.42c: ()
  11.42d: ()
  12.150c: ()

When the syllable that is turned into heavy is followed by (see 3.42d,
4.5a, 7.13b, 11.42bcd, and 12.150c among the examples above), the
phenomenon can be treated as the one described in :

  2.68. As in M Indic generally, anusvāra is often used instead of any
  final nasal. This seems to be more than a merely orthographic matter.
  For it occurs before vowels, in what must have been close juncture […]

  2.69. Most texts make use of this practice in verses for metrical
  convenience. It is absolutely standard practice in all verses to use
  final before a following initial vowel if meter requires a short final
  syllable, but if a long is required. No editor has seen this clearly;
  all editions are confused and inconsistent in this respect. So are the
  mss. to some extent; but they follow the rule in an overwhelming
  majority of instances, and there can be no question of its original
  validity; the exceptions are mere corruptions of tradition.

Upon re-examination, none of the witnesses of the  that were collated,
or only consulted for this purpose (), seems to use an in the above
cases. There is only one exeption:  writes , ° and ° in 11.42 before
vowels (but not !). The same MS has neither or in 12.150c (°°). One
could argue that this lack of awareness of before a vowel indicating in
almost all cases in all MSS are ‘mere corruptions of tradition,’ and
then typesetting such - + vowel combinations as + vowel would be
commendable. On the other hand there is little evidence that in the
transmission of the  s were used in this way. This is why I hesitate to
apply ‘Edgerton’s rule’ in this edition. Another argument against
applying it is all the cases in which the syllable turned into heavy
ends in a vowel (4.39c, 4.59cd, 5.20a, 6.18b, and 8.44d among the
examples above). There can be no orthographocal indication of there;
there may have not been any need of it in the other cases either. In
general, all the metrical laxity discussed above may originate from the
authors’ or redactors’ insensitivity to the difference between
light/short and heavy/long syllables, or short and long vowels, possibly
from the underlying Newar language.

Agaist Newar: no loan words no phonetic changes like l-r

the more original a section the more extreme language? see ch11

Contents of chapters 1–12

The following are brief descriptions of the topics covered in chapters
1–12 of the , which have been edited and translated in this volume.
These are accompanied by brief discussions and some analytical remarks.
[98]

Adhyāya 1

After a -verse that addresses a deity whose identity is obscure (verse
1.1; is it Śiva or the impersonal Brahman?), we enter the first layer of
the text, which consists of a dialogue between Janamejaya and
Vaiśampāyana. This layer could be labelled Dharmaśāstric. Janamejaya
seeks to hear the essence—the ultimate Dharmic teaching—of the . In
response, Vaiśampāyana begins relating a dialogue in which Viṣṇu,
disguised as a Brahmin, tests an ascetic named Anarthayajña, renowned
for performing non-material, i.e., internalised, sacrifice (, the
subject of eleven), and a devotee of Viṣṇu (as revealed in twenty-one).
This marks the beginning of the layer that could be labelled Vaiṣṇava
(see pp. ff).

The first topic they discuss is (1.9–10), an ambiguous definition of the
impersonal Brahman and/or the syllable . The next topics include
(‘death, time’), the origin of the body, karma (1.11–17), and the
divisions of time (from and up to s, 1.18–30), which lead to a teaching
on numbers, ranging from one up to two hundred quadrillion (, 1.31–35).
Verses 1.36–39 introduce a list of the rulers of the eight regions of
Brahmā’s Egg (Brahmāṇḍa, that is, the universe, 1.40–48). In addition,
Viṣṇu is presented as the ruler of the centre of the Brahmāṇḍa (1.49),
reaffirming the general Vaiṣṇava character of this layer. Verses 1.50–57
give the numbers of subordinates to each ruler mentioned above. Verses
1.58–61 teach the measurements of the Brahmāṇḍa. Finally, verses 1.62–75
list the redactors and transmitters of the Purāṇas, from Brahmā to Vyāsa
Dvaipāyana, Romaharṣa, and Romaharṣa’s son Amitabuddhi.

Adhyāya 2

Seemingly a reaction, counterpart, or addendum to the previous chapter
which discussed Brahmā’s Egg, this chapter introduces Śiva’s Egg
(Śivāṇḍa), potentially an innovation of the . Śiva’s Egg is portrayed as
an esoteric, mysterious, and thus superior part of the universe,
accessible only through Śaiva yogic practices (, 2.34). A description is
given of an idealistic and egalitarian society (‘There is no master or
servant there, nobody to be punished and no punisher,’ etc., 2.5ff). The
text goes on to deconstruct the ‘Hindu’ religious universe and the
Dharmic ritual life of the devotee, eliminating the Kalpas and
(2.11–12), all mythological creatures (2.14–15), and ritual action
(2.16).

Following this, the text describes the details of the Śivāṇḍa—its height
and width, its lovely flowers, fruits, golden trees, gem trees, coral
gem thickets and ruby plants (2.17–25). The chapter then introduces a
scheme that divides the Śivāṇḍa into five regions, each connected to one
of Śiva’s five faces, and subdivided into the thirty-eight s of the five
Brahmamantras.

This chapter can be perceived as an innovative attempt to reinforce the
Śaiva character of the text, counterbalancing the previous chapter. It
also seems to reflect tantric, or pre-tantric, Pāśupata ideas and
further emphasises the text’s yogic character by implementing another
esoteric, meditative layer of the universe above, or outside the
Brahmāṇḍa (, 1.39a). One could theorise that this chapter is a tantric,
or Pāśupata, insertion in a non-tantric text, but the fact that the
Śivāṇḍa was already mentioned in chapter one suggests that the two
chapters were likely composed at the same time.

Overall, the concept of the Śivāṇḍa appears to be a bold attempt to
transcend the fundamentals of in a radical manner by relativising basic
social and moral distinctions. This perhaps distantly echoes Pāśupata
teachings, and suggests that Śaivism—or perhaps tantric Śaivism—is
superior to generic Dharmaśāstric tenets. This radicalism, perhaps the
main motive behind the composition of the , is perceivable again in
chapter eleven, which discusses the internalisation of the -system, and
in chapter nineteen, where it is suggested that the s originate from a
social contract.

Adhyāya 3

This chapter starts with general questions about Dharma, including the
etymology of the word , Dharma’s embodiments—especially as a bull—and
the family of personified Dharma (3.1–13). Dharma is declared to be the
embodiment of Śruti and Smṛti (3.14–15). Smṛti is described as
concerning the -system, as well as rules of conduct, i.e., the and
rules, which are the focus of 3.16–8.44. Each rule is five-fold. The s
are: , and . This list is more similar to ones found in the  than to
yogic lists such as the one in the , [99] but the closest parallel is
found in the . [100]

The rest of this chapter elaborates on the first , non-violence (),
focusing particularly on the five kinds of violence (3.18–23). After a
general praise of non-violence (3.24–32), the text discusses
restrictions on meat consumption, quoting  in 3.34–37.

Adhyāya 4

Verses 4.1–17 discuss the second , truthfulness (). After defining truth
(, 4.1), rules for speaking the truth are presented, illustrated with
references to mythological stories.

Verses 4.18–30 cover the third , refraining from stealing (). The fourth
, absence of hostility (), is introduced in verses 4.31–49. It consists
of being kind to Śiva, to fathers and mothers, cows, and guests, with
particular emphasis on the praise of cows and rules of hospitality. The
story of the mongoose in the  ( 14.92–93) is mentioned in this context.

Verses 4.50–59 elaborate on the fifth , self-restraint (), possibly
drawing on the , with further references to mythological stories. The
sixth , concerning taboos () is addressed in verses 4.60–67. These
taboos concern restrictions on sexual partners, taking away others’
wealth and lives, hurting others, and commensality.

The seventh is , which I translate as ‘virtue’ (4.68–76). Five areas of
practising virtue are mentioned here: maintaining silence in four
situations; conquering the fourfold enemy—desire, anger, greed, and
delusion; the ‘four sanctuaries’ (), which are in fact the Buddhist s;
four types of meditation (on Śiva, and the Subtle One); and Dharma as a
four-legged bull. The basic pattern is that each of its five
subcategories has a fourfold structure.

The eighth provides instructions how to avoid mistakes and committing
sins (, 4.77–82), with verses 4.77–81 following . The ninth is charm (),
which involves being kind both mentally and through bodily actions
(4.83–85). The tenth and final is sincerity (, 4.86–89), completing the
section on the ten s.

Adhyāya 5

This chapter begins the section on the rules, which are and . This list
also appears in the  (1.8.29cd–30ab) and the  (3.233.202). The
discussion on the first , purity (, 5.4–20) seems incomplete. As usual,
we expext a list of five sub-types, but there seem to be only four here.
The third and fourth types (- and ) are rather vague, and no details are
given about them. While the first two—bodily purity and purity of
food—are discussed to some extent, partly drawing on  in verses 5.5–9
and 5.10–16, the rest of the discussion is quite general. It seems
likely that the author of this section borrowed a list of four or five
items from an external source but felt unable to elaborate on some of
them.

Adhyāya 6

The second , sacrifice (), is discussed in verses 6.1–18. It again
includes five types: material sacrifice, sacrifice through work and
through recitation, knowledge, and meditation. Corresponding or similar
teachings on the ‘five s’ can be found, in texts such as the  (4.28),
 (3.69–71), and  (1.10).

The third , penance () is the focus of verses 6.19–28. with verses
6.21–22 echoing the .

Adhyāya 7

This chapter addresses the fourth , donation (). The five subcategories
here are donation of food, clothes, gold, land, and cows (7.1–25). The
chapter concludes with praise for the practice of donation (7.26–28).

This chapter is relatively well-written, composed in simple and
generally straightforward language, in contrast to some passages in the
previous chapters that contain radically non-standard Sanskrit. One
cannot help feeling that the author or redactor of this and some of the
following chapters is different from those of chapters one and two, for
example.

Adhyāya 8

In a similarly more or less straightforward chapter, six additional
rules are taught. The fifth , study () is covered first (8.1–6). The
five pillars of the intellectual milieu in which this teaching was
likely composed are Śaivism, Sāṃkhya philosophy, the Purāṇas, Smārta
texts (i.e., Dharmaśāstra), and the  (8.1). Śaivism is defined through
the dichotomy of the Śaiva and Pāśupata traditions. The Sāṃkhya-s are
said to be taught in groups of five, suggesting a 25- system. The  is
identified as .

Verses 8.7–12 list the five types of sexual offences that constitute the
sixth rule ().

Verses 8.13–18 address the seventh , religious observances (). Four of
these observances are, in principle, imitations of animal behaviour:
cats, herons, dogs, and cows. The fifth is somewhat obscure but could be
an imitation of Bhīṣma’s dying scene in the . All of these observances
are radical and may be based on Pāśupata practices.

Verses 8.19–24 teach dietary restrictions as the eighth rule (), with
verse 8.21 drawing on the . Verses 8.25–33 describe the ninth , ,
outlining when to remain silent and what to avoid saying, including
abusive speach and insults.

Ritual bathing () concludes the chapter in verses 8.34–44. This tenth
rule, and consists of five types: fire-bath, water-bath, Vedic bath,
Wind bath, and divine or heavenly bath.

This chapter also concludes the entire section, which has taught twenty
major rules in total, each theoretically consisting of five
subcategories.

Adhyāya 9

This chapter turns to a discussion of the three Guṇas, and . The
treatment of the topic seems less philosophical and more moralising and
classificatory. It categorizes gods, people, animals, plants,
activities, and foods into Sāttvika, Rājasa, and Tāmasa, as well as into
superior, mediocre, and low variants of Sāttvika, Rājasa, etc. Mixed
categories such as Tāmasa-Rājasa are also mentioned.

The chapter concludes by introducing the yogic or moral concept of a
state of being beyond the Guṇas (9.39–43), again most probably insprired
by the .

Adhyāya 10

At the very beginning of this chapter, our interlocutors, Vigatarāga and
Anarthayajña, hand over the narration to Nandikeśvara, who immediately
begins recounting a dialogue between Śiva and Devī. This marks a shift
to a new layer of the text, which can be labelled Śaiva. The topic
discussed is internalised pilgrimage places ().

The significance of this chapter lies in the possibility that the
topographical names mentioned, and their hierarchy, may provide clues
about the text’s place of composition. Another clue of a different
nature is that while the yogic tubes Suṣumnā and Iḍā are mentioned in
verses 10.17 and 20–21, no clear mention of Piṅgalā, the third tube
traditionally associated with them, is seen anywhere in the text. For
more details on both topics, see pp. ff.

Adhyāya 11

This chapter is crucial for understanding what the  may have aspired to
achieve and why the main interlocutor of the Vaiṣṇava chapters is named
Anartayajña. The primary focus here is ‘non-material’ sacrifice, or ,
which essentially represents internalized sacrifice or worship, or
rather the internalisation of all aspects of the religious life of a
‘Hindu’ devotee, within each of the four social disciplines ().

Given the omnipresence of the name and concept of Anarthayajña/, this
chapter could be central to the development of the entire text. See
pp. ff and for more details.

Adhyāya 12

Although non-violence is mentioned alongside hospitality as a topic to
be discussed in this chapter, it is clear that hospitality is the
primary focus of this long chapter. Following verse 12.3, we find a
charming, fairy-tale-like narrative about the adventures of Vipula the
merchant. Vipula is forced to donate his wife to a visiting Brahmin to
honor his promise to his guest, which leads him to leave his home and
wander the world. At this point a series of miraculous events unfolds,
triggered by the fact that a magical fruit with the power of bestowing
youthfulness is gifted to him by a monkey. Instead of eating the fruit,
Vipula gives it away, and the king of Naravīrapura (i.e., Karavīrapura?)
orders him to obtain more such fruits.

A quest for more fruit leads Vipula to the Gandharva king, god Sūrya,
Soma, Indra, Viṣṇu, and ultimately to Brahmā’s palace.

The story ends abruptly, giving the impression that it was part of a
longer narrative. Although the story’s starting point is the necessity
to satisfy a guest’s wishes (, or the rules of guest reception), another
key focus appears to be the rewards of donation (): Vipula donates his
wife to the Brahmin; a monkey gives him a magical fruit; he gives the
magical fruit to the foreman of the guild; the foreman gives the fruit
to the king; it turns out that the fruit was originally given to the
monkey by the Gandharva king; how in turn received it from Indra; and so
forth.

One of the lessons suggested by the story’s conclusion—where Vipula is
honored by Brahmā and other gods—is that donors eventually receive great
rewards. The narrative also features a recurring theme of testing people
while in disguise: Viṣṇu tests Anarthayajña disguised as Vigatarāga (see
1.7–8), and Vipula seems to be tested by a Brahmin who may in fact be
Dharma himself (12.37).

Topics in chapters 13–24

Here follow some preliminary summaries of the chapters in the second
half of the text, to be edited and translated in volume two.

Adhyāya 13

After possibly referring back to chapters ten, eleven, and twelve, Devī
now asks Mahādeva what purpose the easy method () serves when people and
divine beings remain indifferent. Mahādeva’s reply contains references
to the three s and this prompts another question from Devī about them.

The reply that follows touches upon the three Sāṃkhya categories -, -,
and —and transmigration (13.1–14). This triggers another question about
the formation of the embryo . The rest of this chapter deals with this
topic, as well as the pain of being reborn (13.15–68).

Adhyāya 14

A continuation of the previous chapter, this one deals with the question
of differences in bodily appearance among humans: why are some people
short or fat, others tall or thin? Mahādeva explains that food consumed
and actions taken during pregnancy are the main causes (14.1–5). Devī’s
next question concerns bodily defects in a child, such as blindness,
lameness, being born hump-backed or as a dwarf. Again, it is the
pregnant woman who is to blame (14.6–29).

Then the reasons why a child is born male, female, or gender-neutral are
given: it depends on the proportion in which the male semen and the
female blood (14.30–32) mix. The production of semen is discussed
(14.33–38), as well as the possibility of remembering past lives
(14.39–40), and the signs of pregnancy and the signs whether a boy or a
girl has been conceived (14.40–46).

The production of bodily hair is then discussed (14.47–52), alongside
the topic of and (14.47–56).

Adhyāya 15

The first section of this chapter deals with the characteristics of the
soul (, 15.1–15). Then, prompted by Devī’s request, Mahādeva provides a
list of what constitutes the best within various categories: the best of
the four s, the four s, sacrifices, recitations, deities, rivers, and so
on (15.16–29).

Adhyāya 16

This chapter discusses yogic practices. The introduction (16.1–13)
contains some verses that parallel various texts: a citation in
Kauṇḍinya’s commentary on the , the , the , and the .

The next section (16.14–18) is more specific about yogic techniques :
eight sitting postures are listed (), and a -type yogic system is
explicitly introduced ().

From verse 18 onwards we find a series of verses that have close
parallels in the  (16.18–29). The signs of successful practice are
enumerated (16.30–32). Verses 16.33–35 give hints on liberation without
yogic practice.

Next (16.33–47), a new topic is introduced, namely the five important
branches of knowledge : Sāṃkhya, Yoga, the Pañcarātra, the Śaiva
revelation, and Vedic knowledge (echoing and altering  12.336.1). Devī
expresses her satisfaction with what she has heard (16.48–50) and asks
Maheśvara to continue and teach her about donations .

Adhyāya 17

The topics in the first part of this chapter are as follows: the
donation of food, clothes, land, cows, gold (17.1–25). This is followed
by miscellaneous verses connected to donations and the corresponding
rewards that manifest in the next life (17.26–33).

Next come some verses alluding to Purāṇic stories about donation
(17.34–36), and the topic of donating one’s own flesh and blood, son and
wife (17.37–52), again citing legends from the  and the Purāṇas.

The chapter ends by a brief discussion of the levels of donation
(17.53–57) and their respective rewards.

Adhyāya 18

The main topic in this chapter is the marks that indicate that a man has
been to heaven or hell before being reborn in his present life. For
example, if somebody regularly gave food to the poor, he will depart to
Īśaloka and, in his next life, will be rich. Alternatively, if one kills
a Brahmin, one goes to hell, will spend millions of years as an animal
and then will be reborn as a diseased and poor man.

Several examples of this sort are given throught the chapter.

Adhyāya 19

Verses 19.1–19 deal with the importance and sacredness of the cow. Then
the origin of the social classes is discussed, stating that originally
there was only one , [101] and it was only later that the four classes
developed driven by the need to distribute tasks (19.20–36).

Next, the types of penance, worship, and sacred places connected with
the individual s are listed.

Adhyāya 20

This chapter deals with a -type 25- ontological system, as opposed to a
Classical Sāṃkhya-type teaching: no s are mentioned, instead the term is
used; instead of s, s are presented. Also, is called , and the 25th is
simultaneously Śiva, Brahmā, and the Puruṣa.

Verses 20.23–32 deal with the s. Verses 20.83–89 discuss the state of .

Adhyāya 21

In this chapter Viṣṇu reveals his real form to Anarthayajña, who has not
been aware that the Brahmin Vigatarāga, whom he has been teaching is in
fact Viṇṣu in disguise. Anarthayajña praises Viṣṇu, who, being
satisfied, takes him by the hand and leads him to Viṣṇuloka.

By this we are brought back to the outermost layer of the text: the
dialogue between Janamejaya and Vaiśampāyana. The topic here is the æons
.

Adhyāya 22

Here Janamejaya enquires about Anarthayajña. In reply, Vaiśampāyana
gives details about Anarthayajña’s dwelling place, [102] and religious
practice called , described in more detail in chapter eleven.

Yogic practices that echo chapter sixteen are described. A cryptic
ten-syllable mantra is presented in an encoded form, followed by verses
on religious conduct , women, and various categories of professionals of
religious practice .

Adhyāya 23

Janamejaya asks Vaiśampāyana about the reason why gods and demons fight.
This leads to a discussion on and , and on good and bad conduct. This is
followed by verses on how sleep arises.

Adhyāya 24

Janamejaya wishes to hear about the divisions of the world and the
heavens: the hells ), the netherworld , the seven islands , Śivaloka,
and so on.

The text ends with praise of the itself and with the enumeration of the
rewards that one receives if one reads, recites, or listens to this
text.

[1] For cases that may seem exceptions ( and   if more) see the
manusctipt descriptions on pp. ff.

[2] Read  for in .

[3] There is no trace of Nandi/Nandin as identified with the bull in the
. On the possible time after which Nandi or Nandin, originally a , was
considered a , see and .

[4]

[5] See, e.g., . () sums up the trope thus (in the section ‘In animal
terms’): ‘The emphasis on the whole body, with all four legs, assures
the maintenance of stability in dharma’s structure, which in turn
structured Brahmanical society.’

[6] . (, 1552) suggests that ‘In the Purāṇas the bull ( or ) of Śiva is
identified with Dharma, “virtue personified”. This is a new development
to sanctify the animal vehicle of the god. This new situation took place
with the religious rite when an offering of a bull to a Brahmin deemed
to be of a high religious merit.’

[7] Note that  12.87 also mentions the ‘Dharma bull’: | ||. ‘Below the
abode of the Lord, there lives the glorious Dharma Bull. Where the
Heroic Bull is in the world, there are the Cow Mothers.’

[8] In contrast, see an explicit equation of the bull of Dharma with
Śiva’s mount in the  ( fol. 184r ll. 3–4; see ): ; ‘Īśvara spoke: In
this world, foolish people do not know that the four-legged Dharma is
this bright mount of mine.’

[9] See p. .

[10] See pp. ff.

[11] See : .

[12] See, e.g., , and https://siddham.network/inscription/in02001/

[13] .

[14] See, e.g.,  7.1.41: ||.

[15]  1.56.21 reads: . The parallel between the scribal verses in  and
the  has already been noted in .

[16] Understand ?

[17]

[18] Although towards the very end of the text, we are told that this
teaching is also the fine essence of the Purāṇas, Vedas, and Upaniṣads
().

[19] E.g.,  4.78   5.40.3   11.56.

[20] See the relevant artice .

[21]

[22]

[23] See, e.g., .

[24] Generally thought to be the area around Thaneswar/ Thanesar (),
160km northwest of Delhi.

[25] : ‘Naimiśa has been identified with the region around modern Nimsar
on the Gomatī river in Uttar Pradesh (SP vol. I, p. 67, n. 23). This
identification is doubted by Mirashi ().’

[26] See

[27]

[28] .

[29]

[30] .

[31] .

[32] .

[33] . Emend to (‘having nine rivers’)?

[34] Always spelt in Naraharinath’s edition.

[35] This is so, somewhat confusingly, still in the layer that I call
Śaiva.

[36] The references given are the Jaina and .

[37] The city we are looking for is clearly in the South, therefore
Karavīrapura as ‘the Pīṭha of the North’ in Kashmir is not a good
candidate (see, e.g., ). Rather, as (, 35) puts it, it is ‘[a] town
situated on the north of the Western Ghâts near Jooner [Junnar?], on the
bank of the Vená [Venna], a branch of the Krishná, where Krishna met
Parasuráma and killed its king named Srigála (Harivansa).’ See  App. I.
18.352–355:
|
||
|
||
See also  6.106.3:
||

[38] ‘The northern part of the Western Gháts north of the river Káveri’
().

[39] On the area of the Sahya mountain as ‘the southernmost limit of the
authors’ map’ in the ‘the Skandapurāṇa’s literary imagining of a
Pāśupata landscape,’ see .

[40] See  22.4–5:
 ||
‘Vaiśampāyana spoke: Listen, O King, attentively. I shall tell you about
the , the , and the of the great and noble yogin, O king. In the
southern region of the Himālaya, on the Mṛgendra peak, O king, on the
banks of the river Mahendrapathaga, O King[, was his ]’.

[41] The story goes on: in  chapter 8, we find Sūryaketu still dwelling
at Mṛgendraśikhara. Now the demon Mehendradamana wants to marry his
daughter... See details on the identification and on legends in the  and
the  connected to Mṛgendraśikhara in , and in .

[42] See fn. 40.

[43] See . On Acharya’s map, the river is labelled ’Rudramatī (Dhobi
Khola)’. See Figure 4.

[44] On Anarthayajña’s central role in the , see more in .

[45] See a summary of Vipula’s story in the  also in .

[46] Nevertheless, see the word used in  12.155b potentially referring
to the famous story in the .

[47] See, e.g., in  3.34d (≈  5.52) attested in Olivelle’s Devanāgarī
MSS Pu⁵, Pu⁷, Pu⁹; in  3.35d (≈  5.41) attested in Śāradā MSS SOx¹, SPu⁶
and Devanāgarī MS Tr²; in  4.79 (≈  11.57) in a MS from Kathmandu
(BKt⁵), in Devanāgarī/Old Nāgarī MSS (Lo⁴, NPu¹, Pu², Pu⁴, Pu¹⁰), as
well as in two South-Indian MSS (GMd¹, TMd³).

[48] See and . The date is clearly visible as ‘ 156’ in the last line of
the penultimate folio side of /8.

[49] See more detail on this MS, which is now to be found in Munich, in
.

[50] : ‘This Śivadharma ms consists of two major parts, easily
distinguishable by different hands: one that appears to be produced in
9th-c. Nepal […], and another seemingly from a century or so later […]
The next set of folios making up this Śivadharma ms consists of three
titles: the Uttaromāmaheśvarasaṃvāda* (24 folios), the Vṛṣasārasaṃgraha
(50 folios), and the Dharmaputrikā (11 folios). We do not know the
original order of these three works because each section starts with
folio 1. Moreover, even though these three titles appear to be written
by the same hand (probably somewhat later than the ﬁrst part), there is
no certainty that these folios were produced to complement the ﬁrst
part.’

[51] Also verse 11.21.

[52] .

[53] In contrast with, e.g.  10.40–46 and  chapter 5,  1.42–43, or the .

[54] There are also numerous borrowings in  20 from the Śāntiparvan of
the . See more details at the analysis of  chapter 20 in volume two.

[55] See , s.v. and , s.v. .

[56] See details in the notes to the translation of these passages.

[57] Pāśupatas are also mentioned among other religious groups in
chapter twenty-two. See volume two.

[58]  16.34: | ||; ‘Sighing/exhaling is Sadāśiva, a deep breath is
supreme Śiva. In between the two, there is Śiva the supreme and
imperishable Self.’ The word evokes the title of the earliest surviving
Śaiva tantra, the . In  5.50–51, the explanation of in the title is
given as follows: | || | ||; ‘Now () those who do not study the will go
on sighing and sighing. And those who do study the , they will not sigh
again. [For this reason] it is known as the , the compendium of all
Tantras, on knowing which a creature will be released from the bondage
of being in ’ (tr. ). (, 33) adds: ‘On the basis of this passage we may
render the title of the work as ‘compendium () of the essence () of
sighing ().’ One wonders if the connection between breaths and
(Sadā)śiva in the  may relate to Saiddhāntika ideas about the
connotations of the word .

[59] In other cases, does not so clearly involve visualisation; see
2.37, 5.18, 9.32, 11.15, 27, 41, and 12.11.

[60]  20.1ab: | || ‘I wish to learn about the twenty-five Tattvas
truly.’ (Note the use of singular alongside numerals, and see p. .)

[61] Compare, e.g.,  12.337.1 ( | ||) with  16.36 ( | ||).

[62] Could this passage have been influenced by the following passage in
the ?  ||1.3||  ||1.4||.

[63] On Aiśa, see, e.g., , , , , and

[64] See pp. ff.

[65] The earliest dated Newar document is the Ukū Bāhāḥ land grant
palmleaf manuscript from 1114 . See, e.g., .

[66] Compare Kölver’s introductory remarks in his investigation of
‘Newarized Sanskrit’ (, 202) in the  thus (ibid. 192):

‘Number is often ignored

[ 429,19 (cf., 21), 428,12],

as is gender

[ 464, 10 ‘only you have not come’; 470, 8 ‘the Nāga girl made (it) full
of rain’],

and case

[ 426, 2 etc. ‘men worshipped him; he was worshipped by people’; 452, 5
‘I am making an expedient for your sake’].’

[67] I am thankful to Judit Törzsök, who first pointed out to me the
regular nature of the phenomenon itself as seen in the , and who later
drew my attention to the similar Newar grammatical rule (personal
communication, Nov 29, 2023), which led me to an investigation of a
possible link between the Sanskrit of the  and classical Newar.

[68] See, e.g., : ‘The plural ending is wanting where plurality is
expressed in other ways; thus always after numerals, and mostly after
nouns denoting “many, all” ’. Incidentally, singular after numerals is
also the norm in Modern Nepali, and in other, even more distant
languages such as Hungarian.

[69] .

[70] ‘Any case […] and/or plural markers […], as well as postpositions
[…], are added to the last constituent of the N[oun ]P[hrase].’ (.)
E.g.: in the Newar phrase (‘these kings seen by the thief’), the only
indication that multiple kings are involved is the plural marker at the
end (ibid.).

[71] Compare Kölver’s remark on the phrase in a verse in the  (on p. 459
in ): ‘this is a remarkable lack of sensitivity as to the category of
number’ ().

[72]  11.55 (in Olivelle’s edition): ;  Suppl. 12.30: ;  3.228: .

[73]  4.77: .

[74] See, e.g., , and .

[75] See a similarly puzzling situation in the , which is briefly
described in as follows: ‘One of the most intriguing questions
concerning the Bra[hma]Yā[mala] is not why its language deviates from
Pāṇini so often but rather why sometimes it falls back to perfectly
standard Pāṇinian language for fairly long passages.’

[76] Most of them are addressed in the footnotes to the translation.

[77] This often happens in epic Sanskrit, see .

[78] Although this solution carries the metric fault of being iambic.

[79] . Compare (‘he gave that fruit’) in  12:67d.

[80] This happens also in Aiśa. See, e.g.,  18.23: ().

[81] .

[82] Kölver’s ‘dative for direct object’ (), i.e. constructions such as
meaning ’X worshipped him,’ cannot be found in the . Although the  is
obviously earlier than anything Jørgensen describes, it may be of some
interest that according to him (, §27b), this is a late phenomenon in
Classical Newar.

[83] See .

[84] See and .

[85] See, e.g., and .

[86] , and .

[87] I.e. ‘stop with liquid.’ The term ‘muta’ stands for a ‘plosive’
sound or ‘stop’. For a recent contribution on this phenomenon, see,
(discussing it as it appears in Latin).

[88] On its appearance in Śaiva Tantras, see, e.g., and . The latter
concerns the syllable in in  2.55cd: .

[89] See, e.g., . Note that even here, the phenomenon extends beyond
plosive sounds: is rather a fricative.

[90] See, e.g., the cadence of 5.15b: for    -  -

[91] See for an even wider range of conjuncts triggering the same in the
.

[92] .

[93] .

[94] Some editions read °.

[95] I.e.: ‘you are pretty, don’t waste your time with poor village
men.’

[96] There are some problematic verses that I ignore here. They are
unlikely to change the overall picture.

[97] Versions of this line in the  and the  read °, avoiding the
metrical problem (see the apparatus at verse 4.5 in my edition below).

[98] See more details in the footnotes to the translation. See a
Sanskrit summary of the contents of the , based on Naraharinath’s
edition, in .

[99] See, e.g.,  12.8.17ab: . On s and s in the  and related texts, see
also .

[100]  3.233.203: | ||. The  is probably earlier than 1000  (see ).

[101] (19:21). ‘Before the very beginning of all æons, there was one
single class of Brahmins.’

[102] See pp. ff.
